The day I  rst meet Wozniak, we go for a 7-mile walk down a windy beach. I’m in my business clothes and half comatose from jet lag; he’s wearing a track suit and comes toward me with a gait so buoyant he seems about to take to the air. He asks me to walk on the side away from the water. “People say that when I get excited I tend to drift in their direction, so it is better that I stand closer to the sea so I don’t push you in,” he says.Wozniak takes an almost physical plea- sure in reason. He loves to discuss things with people, to get insight into their per- sonalities, and to give them advice—espe- cially in English. One of his most heartfelt wishes is that the world have one language and one currency so this could all be handled more e ciently. He’s appalled that Poland is still not in the Eurozone. He’s ba ed that Americans do not use the metric system. For two years he kept a diary in Esperanto. Although Esperanto was the ideal expres- sion of his universalist dreams, English is the leading real-world implementation. Though he has never set foot in an English-speaking country,hespeaksthelanguage uently.“Two words that used to give me trouble are per- spicuous and perspicacious,” he confessed as we drank beer with raspberry syrup at a tiny beachside restaurant where we were the only customers. “Then I found a mnemonic to enter in SuperMemo: clear/clever. Now Inever misuse them.”Wozniak’s command of English is the resultof a series of heroic experiments, in the tradi- tion of Ebbinghaus. They involved relentless sessions of careful self-analysis, tracked over years. He began with the basic conundrum of too much to study in too little time. His  rst solution was based on folk wisdom. “It is a common intuition,” Wozniak later wrote, “that with successive repetitions, knowledge should gradually become more durable and require less frequent review.”This insight had already been proven by Landauer and Bjork, but Wozniak was unaware of their theory of forgetting or of any of the landmark studies in laboratory research on memory. This ignorance was probably a blessing, because it forced him to rely on pragmatic engineering. In 1985, he divided his database into three equal sets and created schedules for studying each of them. One of the sets he studied every  ve days, another every 18 days, and the third at expanding intervals, increasing the period between study sessions each time he got the answers right.This experiment proved that Wozniak’s  rst hunch was too simple. On none of the tests did his recall show signi cant improve- ment over the naive methods of study he normally used. But he was not discouraged and continued making ever more elaborate investigations of study intervals, chang- ing the second interval to two days, then four days, then six days, and so on. Then he changed the third interval, then the fourth, and continued to test and measure, measure and test, for nearly a decade. His conviction that forgetting could be tamed by following rules gave him the intellectual fortitude to continue searching for those rules. He dog- gedly traced a matrix of paths, like a man pac- ing o  steps in a forest where he is lost.All of his early work was done on paper. In the computer science department at the Poznan University of Technology, “we had a single mainframe of Polish-Russian design, with punch cards,” Wozniak recalls. “If you could stand in line long enough to get your cards punched, you could wait a couple of daysmoreforthemachinetorunyourcards, and then at last you got a printout, which was your output.”The personal computer revolution was already pretty far along in the US by the time Wozniak managed to get his hands on an Amstrad PC 1512, imported through quasi-legal means from Hamburg, Germany. With this he was able to make another major advance in SuperMemo—computing the dif-  culty of any fact or study item and adjusting the unique shape of the predicted forgetting curve for every item and user. A friend of Wozniak’s adapted his software to run on Atari machines, and as access to personal computers  nally spread among students, so did SuperMemo.